Quarkus style enhancements: Security overview doc (#28106)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security.adoc

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Security Architecture and Guides
= Quarkus Security overview

include::./attributes.adoc[]

Quarkus Security provides the architecture, multiple authentication and authorization mechanisms, and other tools for the developers to build a production-quality security for their Quarkus applications.
Quarkus Security is a framework that provides the architecture, multiple authentication and authorization mechanisms, and other tools for you to build secure and production-quality Java applications.

This document provides a brief overview of Quarkus Security and links to the individual guides.
== Security architecture

> == Getting Started

Reviewer: @michelle-purcell I thought of having something at the very top of the doc for the users quickly find a guide leading them to this guide where they can quickly create a secure Quarkus app, without even having to go through this whole doc. It would nice to have it retained somehow, more comments below re this point

Author: :+1: I moved 'Getting started down a little bit. I thought it made sense to come after the Architcture section, which is quite small. If the architecture information grows and we add diagrams etc then we revisit this. Thanks.

> The Quarkus Security Manager uses `HttpAuthenticationMechanism` to extract the authentication credentials from the HTTP request and delegates them to `IdentityProvider` to convert the credentials to `SecurityIdentity`.

Reviewer: Not sure about the `Manager` bit - we don't really have such an entity, only conceptually, `The Quarkus Security` alone should be enough ?

Reviewer: Well, I see `Manager` was already there before :-)- but may be we can remove it, what do you think ?

Author: :+1:

Author: I was actually going to ask you about the Quarkus Security Manager and whether we needed to talk more about that entity. But you've answered my question! Thanks

`IdentityProvider` verifies the authentication credentials and maps them to `SecurityIdentity`, which has the username, roles, original authentication credentials, and other attributes.

For every authenticated resource, you can inject a `SecurityIdentity` instance to get the authenticated identity information.

In other contexts, it is possible to have other parallel representations of the same information or parts of it, for example, `SecurityContext`
for JAX-RS or `JsonWebToken` for JSON Web Tokens (JWT).

== Getting started with Quarkus Security

> Before you start building security into your Quarkus applications, review the overview information to learn about the different authentication and authorization mechanisms that Quarkus supports.

Reviewer: @michelle-purcell I'm not sure about this particular refactoring - I think here we need to link to that getting started guide without interposing the info about the mechanisms

Reviewer: Never mind this one :-), I see this section is still there

`IdentityProvider` verifies the authentication credentials and maps them to `SecurityIdentity`, which has the username, roles, original authentication credentials, and other attributes.

For every authenticated resource, you can inject a `SecurityIdentity` instance to get the authenticated identity information.

In some other contexts you may have other parallel representations of the same information (or parts of it) such as `SecurityContext`
for JAX-RS or `JsonWebToken` for JWT.
In other contexts, it is possible to have other parallel representations of the same information or parts of it, for example, `SecurityContext`
for JAX-RS or `JsonWebToken` for JSON Web Tokens (JWT).

== Authentication mechanisms
== Getting started with Quarkus Security

Quarkus supports several sources to load authentication information from.
Before you start building security into your Quarkus applications, review the overview information to learn about the different authentication and authorization mechanisms that Quarkus supports.

> === Basic and Form Authentication Mechanisms

Reviewer: @michelle-purcell I believe we need to retain a dedicate section listing these mechanisms under `==Authentication mechanisms` and keep a ref to the getting started guide in a sep subsection

Reviewer: Sorry, may be I'm a bit confused :-)

Author: :+1: Done. I put it back.

> == Supported authentication mechanisms in Quarkus Security

Reviewer: IMHO `==AuthenticationMechanisms` is simpler

Author: Gotcha :+1:

> === mutual TLS (mTLS) authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Mutual TLS (mTLS) authentication
```

Quarkus provides mutual TLS (mTLS) authentication so that you can authenticate users based on their X.509 certificates.
For more information, see xref:security-built-in-authentication.adoc#mutual-tls[mutual TLS authentication].

=== OpenID Connect authentication

OpenID Connect (OIDC) is an identity layer that works on top of the OAuth 2.0 protocol. OIDC enables client applications to verify the identity of a user based on the authentication performed by the OIDC provider and to retrieve basic information about that user.

The Quarkus `quarkus-oidc` extension provides a reactive, interoperable, multitenant-enabled OIDC adapter that supports Bearer Token and Authorization Code Flow authentication mechanisms.
The Bearer Token mechanism extracts the token from the HTTP Authorization header. 
The Authorization Code Flow mechanism redirects the user to an OIDC provider to authenticate the identity of the user. 
After the user is redirected back to Quarkus, the mechanism completes the authentication process by exchanging the provided code that was granted for the ID, access, and refresh tokens.

> You can verify ID and access JWT tokens by using the refreshable JSON Web Key (JWK) set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify ID and access JWT tokens by using the refreshable JSON Web Key (JWK) set or introspect them remotely.
```

> However, the JWT and opaque (binary) tokens can be introspected remotely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the opaque (binary) tokens can only be introspected remotely.
```

|Authorization Code Flow authentication mechanism|xref:security-openid-connect-web-authentication.adoc[OpenID Connect (OIDC) authorization code flow mechanism]
|Multiple tenants that can support Bearer Token or Authorization Code Flow mechanisms|xref:security-openid-connect-multitenancy.adoc[Using OpenID Connect (OIDC) multi-tenancy]
|Using Keycloak to centralize authorization|xref:security-keycloak-authorization.adoc[Using OpenID Connect (OIDC) and Keycloak to centralize authorization]
|Configuring Keycloak programmatically|xref:security-keycloak-admin-client.adoc[Using the Keycloak admin client]
|====

[NOTE]
====
* If you need to enable the Quarkus OIDC extension at runtime, set `quarkus.oidc.tenant-enabled=false` at build time and then re-enable it at runtime by using a system property.
For more information about managing the individual tenant configurations in multitenant OIDC deployments, see the _Disabling tenant configurations_ section in the xref:security-openid-connect-multitenancy.adoc#disable-tenant[Using OpenID Connect (OIDC) multi-tenancy] guide.
====

> === OpenID Connect client and filters

Author: Should this be a sub-heading of **OpenID Connect authentication**? 
i.e a   ==== type heading

Reviewer: Hi @michelle-purcell Not really as OIDC client can be used independently from OIDC

Author: :+1:

For example, it can be a public endpoint, or it can be protected with mTLS.

[IMPORTANT]
====
In this scenario, you do not need to protect your Quarkus endpoint by using the Quarkus OpenID Connect adapter.
====

The `quarkus-oidc-token-propagation` extension requires the `quarkus-oidc` extension and provides JAX-RS `TokenCredentialRequestFilter`, which sets the OpenID Connect Bearer or Authorization Code Flow access token as the `Bearer` scheme value of the HTTP `Authorization` header. 
This filter can be registered with MP RestClient implementations injected into the current Quarkus endpoint, which in turn must be protected by using the Quarkus OpenID Connect adapter. 
This filter can be used to propagate the access token to the downstream services.

For more information, see the xref:security-openid-connect-client.adoc[OpenID Connect client and token propagation quickstart] and xref:security-openid-connect-client-reference.adoc[OpenID Connect (OIDC) and OAuth2 client and filters reference] guides.

[[smallrye-jwt]]
=== SmallRye JWT authentication

> The `quarkus-smallrye-jwt` extension provides a MicroProfile JSON Web Token (JWT) 1.1.1 implementation and multiple options to verify signed and encrypted `JWT` tokens and represents them as `org.eclipse.microprofile.jwt.JsonWebToken`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `quarkus-smallrye-jwt` extension provides a MicroProfile JSON Web Token (JWT) 1.2.1 implementation and multiple options to verify signed and encrypted `JWT` tokens and represents them as `org.eclipse.microprofile.jwt.JsonWebToken`.
```

`quarkus-smallrye-jwt` is an alternative to the `quarkus-oidc` Bearer Token authentication mechanism, and verifies only `JWT` tokens by using either PEM keys or the refreshable `JWK` key set.
`quarkus-smallrye-jwt` also provides the JWT generation API, which you can use to easily create `signed`, `inner-signed`, and `encrypted` `JWT` tokens.

For more information, see xref:security-jwt.adoc[Using SmallRye JWT role-based access control].

=== OAuth2 authentication

`quarkus-elytron-security-oauth2` provides an alternative to the `quarkus-oidc` Bearer Token authentication mechanism. `quarkus-elytron-security-oauth2` is based on `Elytron` and is primarily intended for introspecting opaque tokens remotely.
For more information, see xref:security-oauth2.adoc[Using OAuth2].

[[oidc-jwt-oauth2-comparison]]

> === Choosing between OpenID Connect, SmallRye JWT, and OAuth2 extensions

Author: @sberyozkin  - Should _extensions_ be _authentication mechanism_ instead?

Author: Fixed.

> Use the following information to help you to decide which authentication extension to use to secure your Quarkus applications:

Author: @sberyozkin I switched the separate paragraphs to an unordered list. Does this work? 
I wasn't 100% sure if each list item is parallel and works. Please take a look. Thanks :-)

Reviewer: @michelle-purcell Thanks for going for carefully going through this section :-), LGTM

quarkus.http.auth.permission.bearer.auth-mechanism=bearer
----

Ensure that the value of the `auth-mechanism` property matches the authentication scheme supported by `HttpAuthenticationMechanism`, for example, `basic`, `bearer`, or `form`.

== Proactive authentication

By default, Quarkus does proactive authentication, which means that all incoming requests with credentials are authenticated regardless of whether the target page requires authentication.
For more information, see xref:security-built-in-authentication.adoc#proactive-authentication[Proactive authentication].

== Authorization

Quarkus also supports role-based access control (RBAC). 
For more information about RBAC and other authorization options in Quarkus, see xref:security-authorization.adoc[Security authorization].

> == Quarkus Security customization

Author: @sberyozkin I wondered whether this section belongs higher up with the Security architecture information. What do you think?

Reviewer: @michelle-purcell Sure, may be above `Combining authentication mechanisms` ?

Author: Moved :+1:  I also moved '**Authorization**' up with it too.

== Cross-site Request Forgery (CSRF) prevention

Quarkus Security provides a RESTEasy Reactive filter which can help protect against a https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/csrf[Cross-Site Request Forgery] attack. Please read the xref:csrf-prevention.adoc[Cross-Site Request Forgery Prevention] guide for more information.
Quarkus Security provides a RESTEasy Reactive filter that can protect your applications against a https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/csrf[Cross-Site Request Forgery] attack. 
For more information, see xref:security-csrf-prevention.adoc[Cross-Site Request Forgery Prevention].

== SameSite cookies

Please see xref:http-reference.adoc#same-site-cookie[SameSite cookies] for information about adding a https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie/SameSite[SameSite] cookie property to any of the cookies set by a Quarkus endpoint.
You can add a https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Set-Cookie/SameSite[SameSite] cookie property to any of the cookies set by a Quarkus endpoint. 
For more information, see xref:http-reference.adoc#same-site-cookie[SameSite cookies].

== Quarkus Security testing

> == Testing

Reviewer: @michelle-purcell Good point, if you are OK with moving `Testing` to the end of the doc then please do it
